Most other types of insurance
is actuarially stable.
Can't not always predictable but
actuarially you can analyze it. You
can't really do that for war. And then
one thing I think is important to note
and this has been a topic of discussion
I think on the war side is that um
during the year in in peacetime it's
very cheap.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay? It's very cheap. And so I know
that there was a lot of talk about the
cancellations and and stuff like that.
It's really they have to do that
because they're not underwriting based
on the ships transiting war areas.
They're underwriting based on trading in
peaceful areas. So once an area then
becomes subject to a war act they do
have to be able to re-rate that. And so
even though they gave a notice of
cancellation So these are the headlines
we saw at the beginning of the conflict
saying that like war risk insurance has
been pulled right at the start of a war
which was very confusing. Yeah, a lot of
people me included. Yes, yes, yes. Yeah.
I I was getting Instagram reels sent to
me of people trying to explain it and
complete misconception. And when you're
getting reels on P&I insurance it's
you know something big is going on.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, you know
I'm slightly obsessed with insurance.
Maybe obsessed isn't the right word um
but fascinated appreciative of insurers
because I think there's a tendency to
think of them as sort of limiting
factors in the world. So you know if you
can't get insurance in California you
can't build a house. But I also think of
them as enablers of certain behaviors,
right?
>> that's a really good way to put it.
People do a lot of things that they
wouldn't otherwise do
were they not able to get insurance on
it. So yes, it does cut in both
directions. So we should appreciate the
existence of the existence of insurance.
>> All right. Well now we
>> Actually you know what? My daughter
actually
um
>> Your daughter has insurance?
>> She well she actually asked me to
explain insurance to the other day which
I was like you know and then suddenly I
was like I have to explain insurance
>> of all tell the listeners how old your
daughter is.
>> I was trying I can't remember the
context exactly what it was maybe
something about fire insurance etc. But
I think I I was actually pretty proud of
myself. I was basically like there are
these risks that happen where like say
if your house burns down you could like
ruin you financially but it doesn't make
sense to like save all that money in
cash and always have that much savings
available to be able to rebuild your
house and therefore the way you solve it
is by paying a small amount. I was I'm
pretty like happy. I think she got it.
>> I'm glad she's planning for home
ownership at an early age. Um okay. Well
now is a really good time to think and
appreciate insurance because as you know
we are recording this on April 8th. I
feel like do I need to say the hour?
Maybe I do. 12:06 p.m. on April 8th. It
is not entirely clear at the moment what
is going on in the Strait of Hormuz. We
don't know if ships are being allowed to
pass or not but we do know since the
earliest days of this entire conflict
happening that one of the issues that's
come up is war insurance and maritime
insurance in general. Yeah and we sort
of like touched on it in our very first
episode that related to the war but of
course one major reason why ships
haven't been moving through is the
direct threat
being attacked and sinking. But then
another element is the entire insurance
element and then beyond that like that
adds cost to everything and I it's not
you know how do you price war insurance?
I have no idea. So
I have many more questions on this
topic.
>> Yeah, the whole ecosystem of maritime
insurance in general. You hear these
things thrown around like whole loss
protection and liability protection and
there's the reinsurers and then there's
the normal insurers and then there are
insurance clubs. Right, there are all
these different
>> be part of an insurance club. You're you
you belong to the Soho club. Me, I
belong to an insurance club. Like think
of how that's
You kind of have the club jacket thing
going
>> a jacket today. at the moment. Okay.
Well, we do in fact have the perfect
guest to talk about all of this. We're
going to be speaking with Dorothea
Yuani. She's the chief executive officer
of the managers of the American P&I
club. Amazing.
>> You can ask her if you can join.
>> Can I join? Um as well as well as
>> I need like one I need one member to
endorse me and another one. That's how
it works at these clubs.
>> All right. Well, the second member who
could potentially endorse you is Steve
Okalukian. He is the reinsurance
director at the American P&I club. So
truly the perfect guest. Thank you so
much for coming on Odd Lots. Great to be
here. Thank you.
>> Thank you for having us. Thank you.
>> Why don't you go ahead and tell Joe what
is an insurance club and can he can he
be part of one? Okay, great. First of
all
I love that you talked about insurance
especially from our perspective. Clubs
were enablers. Um so what are clubs?
Clubs in our context the P&I club which
means protection and indemnity
is a collective. It's a non not for
profit assessable mutual association.
It's not a commercial
insurer and it basically historically is
a club that brought together ship owners
in the industry that were trying to fill
a gap. So they came from a need for
society and really what clubs do is
while they insure the owner they are
protecting society because they are
insuring the owner for what you referred
to before as liabilities. So that would
be like
losses or damages that they caused to
other people not to themselves. So the
clubs never pay own damages. We will not
pay
damage that occurs to the vessel in an
accident or if they have economic loss
their own economic loss. So what P&I
clubs do is
they step in and they protect the owner
and defend the claims but they
ultimately pay whatever is the fair
compensation or whatever is adjudicated
for passengers that perhaps get hurt on
the ship due to negligence of the of the
ship. Claims from crew that might get
hurt in an accident. Liabilities related
to collision. So if the ship hits
another ship and they cause damage or
personal injury to that to people or
crew on the other ship they'll pay that.
Oil pollution, environmental damage, you
know, so clean up related to that. So
basically the way we like to think about
P&I and you really should think about it
like this. It's it's the safety net and
it is the
only way that a ship can trade. So for
example, let's look at what you do with
your car, right? You're not allowed on
the road if you don't have liability
insurance, right?
>> Mhm. You don't have to have own damages
insurance, right? But you do need to
have liability because we need to know
that all the all the cars on the road
have financial security behind them that
if something happens and somebody else
gets hurt there's compensation that's
going to come from somebody that's
responsible. So that's the concept let's
say
of a P&I club.
And you mentioned that it's a structured
as a nonprofit. So I take it that you're
doing this just out of the goodness of
your heart. No, that's a that's a joke.
But I talked to us about like so then
What's the concept behind it?
>> Well so like why is it that and then who
is bearing the risk for which they're
taking a profit?
>> Okay. So let's go a little bit to the
history of it so you can understand it.
So basically if you go back in time
let's say up until the 1800s um
up to a certain point there was no
liability
for for most of your marine liability
insurance. As things started to change
and they started to impose strict
liabilities, regulatory changes started
to happen in various countries,
passenger liability started to increase
and also the liability started to get a
lot more volatile. Your regular
commercial insurers did not want to
touch it. They couldn't price it. They
didn't want to deal with it and also
your classic policy would have a limit
of the value of the ship and a lot of
times liabilities would exceed that.
>> Oh yeah, yeah.
>> So what happened was the ship owners
came together to say well, we can't
allow like you said before, you know,
number one you can't put all of this
money aside until the time is needed and
you also can't risk becoming financially
destitute, right? In the instance that
you have a catastrophe. So the ship
owners came together and said let's pool
our risks. So the not for profit element
is this. So that the concept goes to in
principle we each put a certain amount
of money into a pool. It's based let's
say Floating that they agree club
members. They have to be ship owners by
the way. So if you do have an ocean
going vessel we could consider making
you a member.
Just to say. So there's a formula or
an underwriting formula where everybody
pays a certain rate per ton, okay?
And then dating back to the beginning of
time when they started this
if all of the losses were less than the
amount that they had put aside into the
pool then they could either have it
returned or they could save it for the
next year and pay less the next year.
>> Mhm. And each year there would be a
reconciliation but if the losses were
more they each had to put in
you know, pro rata based on their
tonnage and based on the formula. So
that's the concept of nonprofit. Now of
course back then regulation wasn't the
way it is today. So now you're not
allowed to just keep enough to pay your
losses. So now there's regulatory
requirements. So now the nonprofit is
kind of increased to you need to be
healthy nonprofit. So you have to meet
certain solvency ratios under
regulation. So that's the concept. I
don't know if you wanted to add anything
on that piece.
>> it's providing at cost insurance
>> Okay. for the members of the club. So
like you said you want to join the club.
If the four of us have vessels and we
want to form our own P&I club
you could theoretically do that. Pool
our money together as Dorothea said and
say hopefully it's enough to meet the
claims for the year. If not we're fine
putting in more but it's better than
going through commercial underwriter
who's going to charge double that cuz
they need to make a profit
and they don't want to take a loss. So
it's kind of like self-insurance. So
like right, so it's kind of like
self-insurance. I'm
not sure.
>> we might think of something that exists
at the firm level. And this is
self-insurance kind of at the industry
level.
>> Right, exactly. Right, exactly. So one
of the things that comes up immediately
if you type in American P&I Club into
Google is it says it's the only American
insurance club. And there are a bunch
apparently in London and actually I
would like to talk about how London
became like a big Yeah. insurance
capital in general. But why is there
only one American insurance club? Okay,
well then we'd have to go back and talk
about how the American
club was born, right? So yeah, so
historically the
the origins of organized insurance
really are into the financial center of
the London market. Actually started I
think with uh remind me Steve with some
brokers in a coffee shop in London that
you know started to decide well, you
know, we actually it's the same concept
of of how the clubs developed but at the
more fundamental level of the basic
well, we don't want to risk losing the
cargo or the ship in route. So you know
underwriters were kind of born through
that through that process. Um but um
the American club actually was born much
later. So the American operators
historically were insuring with the
London clubs.
And then 19
uh 16 uh the Americans were not in World
War I yet, right? Um the UK was. So the
UK at that time passed what was called
the UK pay trading with the enemy act uh
which basically says, you know, if you
are um you know
trading with my enemy then you're my
enemy. And at that time the United
States was not in. Certain American
operators were still involved in certain
types of trade and the UK then this act
prohibited a lot of American operators
from continuing to have their insurance
um with the UK clubs at that time. So
back then the large the I think was the
largest US broker, Johnson & Higgins I
think at that time came together with
ship owners, industry lawyers uh and and
lobbyists and legislators and um
realized that they were going to have to
create something in the United States.
And I think that this is is very
interesting how it's kind of very timely
of what's going on in the United States
right now because we're we're seeing
that you know, in terms of our peers, in
terms of other countries, even our
allies or even non-allies um we've kind
of fallen behind on the maritime side,
right? So in the industry um like we
used to be the number one maritime
nation in the world. Um and and now
we're we're definitely not. And so they
came together and they um
uh they surveyed the American operators
to see would you be interested and would
you join an American P&I Club that would
fundamentally work the way the London
clubs would would already work. And they
got a lot of favorable response and then
within the
within the year they had enabling
legislation in New York State um which
created the structure cuz it didn't it
didn't exist before that and had needed
to be have a regulatory structure. Um
and on February 20th, February 14,
sorry, Valentine's Day 1917 the American
Club was born. And since then it's not
an easy thing to put together a club,
you know, cuz you have to you start from
scratch really. Right. And so since then
we have been the only club and we've
brought we've taken the United States
through two World Wars since then. Um
but also been a part of this whole ebb
and flow of the American maritime
industry. Yeah. And I was going to say
that doesn't mean that our members are
only American.
>> No. So historically Explain this. Yeah,
yeah. So explain why that is.
>> So I mean it's just the name now is the
American Club. And then you have the
Swedish Club, you have the London Club,
you have the Japan Club.
>> But there were members who are global.
Global, so
>> the world.
>> Right. So I would say
maybe 30 years ago we were probably 80%
maybe even more Yeah. um US based
membership.
>> we went uh
international.
>> globalization after it in the 90s Wait,
how do how do ship owners decide which
club to be a member of?
A lot of it's service oriented. Um
Again, who you know, right? You have a
friend who owns a ship and he's like I'm
with the American Club, I'm with this
club. Have a great experience with them.
Close with the claim handlers,
underwriters. If I need something they
pick up the phone, I can talk to them.
I'll make the introduction. So it could
be as simple as that. Or some people
just go on Google and say I need to join
I need P&I insurance. Where could I go?
And maybe if they're American they see
American P&I Club.
>> like a maritime insurance comparison
site where you get all the different
rates or something like that? That'd be
pretty fun. Uh yeah, no. Not exactly
about that. But there is an
international group of P&I clubs. I
don't know Steve if you want to Right,
so
>> talk about that how that works.
>> So there's collectively now there's 12
international group clubs known as the
International Group of P&I Clubs.
Collectively we insure 90% of ocean
going tonnage. Um so being a member of
one of those clubs
it effectively the same way the clubs
work together, they pool risks
the group works together in the same
way. So being a member of the
International Group it allows you and I
there's a few core functions of the IG.
As a reinsurance director selfishly I'll
say the most important is the
reinsurance purchasing power that the
group clubs have. So collectively the 12
clubs come together every year
and they purchase policies.
I think it's the largest reinsurance
policy in the world.
There's roughly 85 separate reinsurers
on this.
various points of the world.
And we insure risks up to well, we
provide cover
about for about 8 million 8 billion
dollars per incident. But we buy
reinsurance collectively with the other
clubs up to 3 billion. So it's fairly
unique cuz they are competitors of ours
but together we realize the best thing
for an individual ship owner is to have
this group purchasing power. And allows
us to buy high levels of reinsurance at
pretty inexpensive cost.
>> It's so interesting cuz I guess like
insurance by per se is all about
pooling. Right. Right. So you're just
like layers and layers and that's
spreading the risk in sectors. So I
certainly want to get more soon to like
the sort of the role of this P&I
insurance within the context of the war
right now.
>> And so forth. But one quick question I
have
um you mentioned that uh entities
contribute based on their tonnage. Yeah.
And you know, when I think when you use
the driving insurance analogy to talk
about liability you know, there are
various factors that go into how much
how old are you? Yeah. Have you taken
defensive driving? How many tickets
you've gotten? etc.
Why is tonnage which is not a metric
that would suggest risk to others in my
mind an important proxy here?
>> No, it's not it's not a risk factor. It
is how we multiply the rate is per ton.
The rate per ton comes from all of those
risk factors.
So one might pay $1 a ton, somebody else
pay $2 a ton, somebody may $5 a ton. Oh,
I see. So it's not that there's like a
fixed per No. Okay, so talk about that
pricing of Yeah. Got it. Yeah. Not all
tonnage is created equal
right? So if you have
a small barge Yeah. that doesn't have
any crew it's just carrying
>> Yeah. coal up and down a river versus a
large cruise ship where you have
multiple crew members and passengers on
there. You know, that one ton if you
will on each vessel is not the same. So
they're going to get priced differently.
They're going to get priced differently.
Okay, so it's not really about It's not
about it's just a measuring I see. Yeah,
that makes sense. It's just a measuring
tool. But like let's say you have the
same sector you have the same type of
ship
a lot of the same factors the smaller
ship's going to pay less than the larger
ship simply because of the tonnage let's
say. So they might both be charged at $5
a ton for example. That is also a factor
in uh assessing limitation of liability.
Do the clubs play a role in like
insuring
training of the crew and things like
that that would be proxies Okay. safety
and so forth?
my question because one of the other
reasons we appreciate insurers here is
because like they're arbiters of
behavior. Yeah. Right? And especially at
a time when a lot of governments seem to
be, Yeah. you know, stepping back from
certain markets, it's often like the
private insurers who are saying like
this is what you need to do in order to
get insurance. What are the requirements
for ship owners order to be eligible
Okay.
Great. Great. That's a that's a great
question. So one um there are a lot of
requirements.
Um and yes, loss prevention is a big
thing that also differentiates us from
commercial Yeah. underwriters. If you go
to the website you'll see a whole
section on loss prevention. Um so uh
number we do look at quality of the
operation. We do look at the experience
of the people that are running the the
management. Um there are warranties as
well. So number one you have to be uh of
a technical level in terms of quality.
So that uh we're going to get a little
bit complicated here. Please. Okay, so
ships are also subject to other
requirements independent of the club and
that's subject to the requirements of
their classification society. So the
classification society are like the
surveyors a technical arbiters let's say
that come in and and make sure that the
ship is of uh certain quality
technically. So you have to be in we
call it in class um is what we call it.
And that's definitely a requirement. Um
and then of course we also require that
you are conducting only legal trade. So
that is another aspect I will hand it
over to Steve to add other aspects on
the underwriting side. Um The main I
mean we we do management audits as well
obviously. So we bring cuz
sometimes it's a startup. Right? Which
is tough cuz there's no history there to
see where they've been. Ideally as an
underwriter
you're looking at a client who's been
with another club and is looking to
switch. So, they come over, you see a a
loss record, you have a pattern, you
know where they're operating, what
they're doing. When it's a startup, it's
a bit more difficult than that
where we'll go out
and again sometimes it could just be
proactively
we haven't met this member. Let's see
them in person what they're up to, get
on their ships. Um other times
>> surveys, yeah, from that perspective.
Quite often we would do a condition
survey. So, we would do a in that case
like a pre-entry condition survey. Yeah.
Where if the vessel is older than 10
years of age, we'll say we need to see
it. Even though it's in class, we just
want to make sure from a P&I perspective
>> and
>> that there's certain things that check
all the boxes for it to come into the
club. Wait, what actually constitutes
risky behavior on the part of a ship?
Because again, if we go to the driving
analogy, like okay, speeding is bad.
That would be risky. Driving drunk would
be very bad. Yeah.
>> Yeah. What's like the equivalent of a
ship?
Well, you would Well, the other thing
that we look at is the history and the
claims record, right? So, we would see
the incidents and the types of
incidents. So, if we see uh patterns or
trends,
um a lot of times it has to do with
their trading. So, certain trades might
be a little bit riskier than others and
that just comes from our actuarial
analysis. So, each club also takes their
portfolios and analyzes the trends on
the claims and you'll determine the
levels of risk and your risk appetite
with that. So, like um for example, our
experience has shown us that um
container ships have certain types of
risk that might not be the same as
others. So, while some people might look
at a container ship and say, "Okay,
well, they do liner business, so they're
quite organized, right? They're quite
sophisticated."
>> Liner So, going from one port to another
often, right? So, that means that
they're very familiar with the two
ports. The the people are very familiar.
The the approach of management is quite
sophisticated. Um and then you might
look at it from a risk perspective and
say, "Okay, how much are are each of the
containers worth in case there's an
accident and they fall?" But you have to
think bigger than that. So, for example,
if there's a casualty on a container
ship and it's a total loss
um in in any seaway, in any ocean in the
world, the catastrophe risk is much
different than let's say
a bulker that might sink or or a tanker
because those individual containers, for
example, will start to pop up and float
to all different places on all different
coasts
wherever
whatever's adjacent to the sea that it
has sunk that it that it sank in. Um in
which case though, part of the liability
includes cleaning those all up and those
types of containers are considered
hazardous waste. So, there's a special
disposal process that has to go can be
quite expensive. It can also cause
danger to navigation in seaway. So, you
see what I mean? So, it really you look
at the type of ship that you're looking
at and you look at the type of claims
that it might
that can possibly arise. But we look
mainly, Steve, I would say at we look at
industry, but we look mainly each club
will look at their own um experience um
and decide that you know what what they
classify as
risky behavior. We look we analyze
claims and we learn from the claims to
decide what we think is what we're what
we're willing to tolerate and what we're
not willing to tolerate or what we're
willing to tolerate, but we're going to
charge a lot more, for example, because
the risk is higher. I don't know
>> know if you wanted to add anything.
>> to say a lot of it too is human error.
So, you could do all these actuarial
studies
to say that this vessel operating in
this region is likely to have X amount
of claims per year, but you can't
account for a crew member not sleeping
or being or falling asleep at the wheel
basically and causing an accident, which
has happened. So, a lot of it's human
error, not being trained properly, small
things. I mean, as P&I insurers, people
look at us and think
large oil spills, wreck removals, the
big headline claims, but our average
claim is about 20 or 30,000 dollars per
claim. So, could be a small crew claim,
cargo claim. So, these are the things
that add up and determine how a P&I club
is operating, not so much the one-off
big incident. Yeah, and sorry, I just
wanted to add one more thing going back
to the original question that you posed
in terms of what is our role in terms of
training, let's say, or loss prevention.
So, while we are not the primary people
or group that's responsible for training
crews cuz there's crew managers, the
operators themselves have to do that.
The the training that they get in the
schools that they go to and stuff are
really What we do though is based on our
analysis of our claims though, we
identify gaps, we identify issues, we
identify trends and then we do actually
have programs that enhance training. So,
we from whatever they're doing, we will
add things. So, you'll look on our
website and you'll see that we have
regulatory training that the owner can
use to actually track the training of
their crews that make sure that they
know certain minimum standards of the
regulatory knowledge, let's say. Are
they familiar with how to handle like
the collision regulations, for example,
and other types of um modern regulations
for navigate navigating at sea. Um we'll
also do we've also done vlogs, we've
done interviews, we do seminars,
um and then we also do like a good catch
series. So, if you you'll see that we
take our cases and we analyze near
misses and then we identify what people
what our what our
owners and their crews and their people
ashore can do better in order to prevent
that in the future. So, speaking of
human error,
I have a personal question, which is
this is kind of Odd Lots lore, but I'll
repeat it
for people that don't know the story,
but many years ago, I guess 4 years ago
or so. It feels longer, doesn't it?
Okay, 4 years ago, my furniture got
stuck on a container ship called the
Ever Forward that ran aground in the
Chesapeake Bay.
Um and I think an investigation found
that the pilot had been using his phone
or something, which is kind of crazy to
think about.
I didn't see any insurance payout from
that. I know my property wasn't like
actually damaged, but it was kind of
annoying not having a couch for a couple
months or however long it was. If
something like that happens, what is the
actual distribution of the insurance
payout? So, who does it actually flow to
ultimately? Like does it eventually
reach the customer who's shipping stuff
on these ships? There's not like a a
straightforward answer. There's a lot of
dependencies that go along with that and
it has to do with you know the the
contract that you have, right? Um and
the various insurances that are placed.
Um now, to a certain extent, there has
to be a certain limit on what could be
considered too remote, for example.
Um so,
um and under certain regimes, you would
probably have to have physical damage in
order to be able to claim the the
economic loss related to that. Um that
is probably the reason why a lot of
times when you ship things, they ask do
you want insurance so you can so you can
insure yourself cuz there's no guarantee
that ultimately that will get up to the
um the the P&I club um for example,
because it it just flows into
contractual liabilities under that.
>> But but the the shipper would have cargo
insurance as a whole to get from point A
to point B. And obviously part of that
is it's going to be on a vessel most
likely. So, if the ship owner is
negligent and they're found liable for
that loss, so like you said, he was on
the phone, vessel grounded, then a cargo
underwriter would go after the owner,
which ultimately gets covered by the P&I
clubs.
>> I see. Okay. By the way, I'm on your
website and you guys have some great
posters, these safety posters that
people should go check out.
>> Do they say don't be on your phone when
you're navigating?
>> there's one that says something simple
as that. Yeah, there's one that says and
I get
I kind of want to get one of these
framed like for my house. They're really
cool looking. I would blow it up. But
like there's a feed your focus one, shut
off personal cell phones. I see you
guys, you know, it's like safety stuff.
Yeah. Um anyway, people should go check
these out. This will go out to all our
members. Yeah, that's what I'm saying.
So, to me but also listeners should just
go out and download these cuz they're
pretty cool looking. You know, we also
sorry, just that you said that,
something that could also apply to
people not in the maritime industry. We
have a whole series related also to like
sexual harassment that creates awareness
for you to understand what that means.
That simple things that
even based on certain cultural or even
habitual type of behaviors that can be
considered sexual harassment creates
awareness for it. It's a really
fantastic um Yeah, there's a lot of good
uh there's a lot of good resources here.
All right, let's talk about like the
context
>> different insurances
within the war in Iran. And the reason I
mean, the issue to my mind is like,
okay, so are you affected by it? Because
when I think about the situation, I'm by
and large not thinking about risks that
ships are going to pose to others in the
context of war, right? As opposed to
risks to the ship. So, like talk to us
about like the degree to which for your
P&I okay is a factor or the Iran war is
a factor in the world of P&I insurance?
Well, I'm going to give you the the big
picture and then Steve will analyze it
will break it down.
So, traditionally war has its own
special sector of war underwriters, war
insurance. The P&I
standard policy excludes liabilities
that arise out of
war acts. However, there is uh an excess
level of cover that is offered by the
P&I club simply because the standard
policies are limited by the value of the
vessel. Now, I'm going to hand it over
to
to Steve.
>> talking about P&I and liability, but if
you're a ship owner, you so you come to
us for your P&I insurance.
>> Yeah. You go to a hull and machine
underwriter for hull and machinery
for the vessel's value, what's on the
ship, right? So, you have two separate
towers of insurance. Yeah. Um so, we
cover the liability, they cover the
hull,
but because we exclude war risks, Yeah.
it's traditionally offered There's a few
places they could go. Traditionally, the
hull underwriter will give you war risk
cover for P&I and hull up to the value
of the ship.
>> Okay. So, if you have a $10 million
ship,
you're insured. So, the ship sinks, it's
a total loss, you're covered for $10
million. Underwriter, Yeah. writes you a
check.
There's a pollution element. They'll
cover $10 million of that loss as well.
Okay. So, that should traditionally P&I,
but because we excluded the hull war
underwriters Just Sorry, just to be
clear. Yeah. If a ship
is sunk in the war,
>> Right. then there could also be a
liability on the part of the owner for
the pollution Correct.
>> caused by their own ship having been
sunk. Potentially.
>> Potentially. Potentially. There's a lot
of nuances here. It depends There's a
lot of nuances to that, too. It has to
do with also um convention There's
certain international conventions that
um exclude if it's subject to war, but
then there's certain national
legislations that carve that out. So, it
depends on where you might where it
might happen. Sorry, just to be clear
though, like when you talk about like
you said there's a war exception or you
don't cover war
>> We don't cover it. Yeah, standard P&I
cover would exclude it. But why would
P&I ever cause a war
include war risk? Because the question
is like war to my mind does not
>> a crew What if a crew member dies?
That's P&I. That's liability.
>> So, that is Okay, I see. I see. Okay, so
this is really important. So, the a crew
a crew member's death in a war
would be Or a crew member's death would
be P&I. Yes. Right.
>> But you don't in a war that you do not
cover
>> Unless Got it. So, we mentioned
pollution, we mentioned crew. Wreck
removal would be one, so you know,
vessels going through the strait. Yeah.
>> There's mines. If it were to sink and
it's a wreck and it's in a shipping
channel,
>> Yeah. eventually and and let's say the
conflict ends, well, now you have a a
wreck there that needs to be moved.
>> Yeah. So,
P&I clubs would have to step in and
remove that wreck, which will cost a lot
more than the value of the vessel.
So, what the P&I clubs do offer is what
Dorothea mentioned, excess Uh-huh.
insurance. So, excess of the hull's
value, Yeah. knowing that a wreck or
pollution event could
>> likely not crew, but a you know, a
larger loss
could breach that $10 million or
whatever the value is, but in this
example, $10 million.
You breach that threshold, the P&I
clubs, as part of our collective
reinsurance buying,
>> we buy reinsurance for war P&I.
And every ship owner who's entered in
any IG club
every year pays a small amount. It's not
a lot, but they pay a small amount for
that coverage. So, we we fill that gap.
So, just to be clear, just to spell this
out, in a war, Right.
you do not you're do not provide war
insurance. The The vessel would go to
some other commercial carrier. And they
would have that in place.
>> would have that. Yeah. But the P&I club
does offer this excess based on the
reinsurance purchasing power beyond what
the commercial carrier may offer. This
is great. And effectively, we're buying
it on their behalf. Yeah, got it. So, I
have what might be a a dumb question,
but like why are all these different
risks so bifurcated between different
players? Like why is there a separate
whole protection provider, a war risk
provider? If I'm buying home insurance
for the most part, like I just go to an
insurer and it's like, okay, we're going
to cover your roof damage as well as
like whatever else might happen. I don't
have to go to three different insurers
for the most part. Yeah. I think it
comes out of exclusions. Um so,
originally, the hull underwriters didn't
want to offer coverage for liabilities
cuz like Dorothea said, they didn't know
how to price it. It wasn't their forte.
So, there was a gap in cover. Right.
Yeah.
So, P&I clubs were born out of that. So,
now you have a club and you want to be
able to project what your claims will be
in a given year. So, P the club members
are insuring their themselves or each
other for what I'll call predictable
risks,
going from port A to port B with a
certain cargo, accidents happen.
But if something is Yeah. a little more
specialized. So, if you have a vessel
operator who's involved in drilling
um and production operations, that would
be excluded as well cuz that's not a
mutual poolable risk. Cuz that might be
a one-off where you may be doing that
with your vessel, but the three of us
may be saying, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, we
don't want to cover that." Yep. That's a
complete different risk. So, war falls
into that cuz it's hard to predict. So,
the P&I underwriters excluded war
traditionally and now created There's
war clubs or hull would step in and
offer limited war cover. I mean I mean,
it's important to keep in mind, too,
that like war risk is not actuarially
stable, right? It's not like the rest of
the risks. It's really just subject to
you know, geopolitics and and and and
you know, national relations, you know,
between countries and um it's really
just it's just based on that. Whereas,
most other types of insurance
um is actuarially stable. Um can't not
always predictable, but actuarially, you
can analyze it. You can't really do that
for war. And then the one thing I think
is important to note and this has been a
topic of discussion, I think, on the war
side is that um
during the year in in peacetime, it's
very cheap. Okay?
>> It's very cheap. And so, I know that
there was a lot of talk about the
cancellations and and stuff like that.
It's really They have to do that
um because they're not underwriting
based on the ships transiting war areas.
They're underwriting based on trading in
peaceful areas. So, once an area then
becomes subject to a war act, they do
have to be able to re-rate that. So,
it's not And so, even though they gave a
notice of cancellation, So, these are
the headlines we saw at the beginning of
the conflict saying that like war risk
insurance has been pulled right at the
start of a war, which was very
confusing. A lot of people were
confused. Yes, yes, yes, yes.
I I was getting Instagram reels sent to
me of people trying to explain it and
complete misconception. And when you're
getting reels on P&I insurance, Oh yeah,
god. you know something big is going on
and Yeah, I don't know if you want to
explain why the P&I clubs had to give
that notice that we gave cuz everybody
said, "Oh, the P&I clubs are canceling
war. We We don't cover war, but in
certain instances, we do." Why don't you
explain where we cover it? Yeah. Right.
Just to kind of back up a bit and what
the cancellation means. It's really a
cancellation of the rate, not of the
cover.
So, everyone was saying, "Oh, these
vessels are trapped because they don't
have insurance."
And, you know, Lloyd's in London is
almost doing this to get back to the US.
First of all,
all those Not all, but many of the
underwriters at Lloyd's are American
companies. So, it wasn't the UK saying,
"You know, we're going to get the US
back for this. We don't support the war.
Pull insurance coverage, the vessels are
trapped." That's not the case. Every war
policy, even though we're not war
experts or war underwriters,
the way it works, every war policy has a
notice of cancellation clause saying if
basically, if a war were to break out,
like you have here and vessels are now
in the Gulf, well, we didn't price for
that. We gave you a cheap rate cuz
you're sailing around the world. Now
you're in a war zone,
the risk changes. So, we cancel your
policy and meaning we cancel the rate
you paid.
Give you 3-day notice.
You're covered if something happens. So,
if you're if you're struck, okay, you're
still covered.
But now after that 3 days lapses, you
have to buy your cover back at a higher
rate based on If you're trading there,
if you're not trading there, it doesn't
affect you at all. You don't know what
it Yeah. So, if you're trading there,
So, that's what we Those were the
headlines, the notice of cancellation.
So, it looks like This is so helpful. Um
But P&I Why did the P&I clubs give a
notice? Right. So, P&I Cuz I think that
confused people. are mutual risks or
not. So, anything that's pooled and has
this excess war
was not impacted. But we also offered
cover to charters.
So, not just ship owners. If you're
chartering a vessel and that
>> we know what a charter is? For
Okay. Tracy's not I don't have no idea.
A charter it's kind of like when you
when you lease a car, you're kind of
It's like you're chartering it. So, you
don't own it. You don't own it. You're
paying somebody to use it. Okay. So, And
the the owner is liable most of time for
big oil spills, wreck removal, whatever
may be, but a charter could be found
liable for some of this. Yeah. So, a
charter's risk because it's not pooled
with any IG and there's separate
reinsurances for that. That includes
war. Right.
>> So, that's always been a pass-through.
So, we'll we will include charters P&I
war cover.
And because we received a notice of
cancellation from our reinsurers, we
tell them we have to cancel
uh your war cover in the Persian Gulf,
but give us 2 days and then we're going
to come up with a solution, which is
what came up.
We had a solution they could buy it back
at a higher rate. How much did the
premium actually change?
It depends on where they were calling,
but it was
to give an example, there was like one
vessel we saw their war slip, their
traditional war before the war broke
out. They were paying about $15,000 a
year for that.
And then when the rates first came out
from the underwriters to get the vessel
out of the Gulf,
it was going to cost about $60,000.
Just just for a 7-day period to get it
out. Once the strait closed and there
were mines in the strait, there was a
separate notice given.
If you're transiting the strait, so now
you have a war, we call it a buyback.
It's a reinstatement of the cover.
You have your war buyback for the
Persian Gulf. You're covered in there,
but if you're transiting the strait,
there's a new exclusion that may apply
with new rate rating. Wait, sorry, you
said mines in the strait.
>> Right. A, are there definitely mines?
Cuz I think there's been some discussion
of that. And then B, this kind of gets
to the question um that Joe mentioned at
the intro. I know I talked about
insurers as enablers of behavior, but
when you're in a war situation, I assume
people also don't want to be killed.
>> Exactly. Even if they can get insurance,
that wasn't the first factor. Exactly.
That's what we wanted to get to. The
vessel they weren't trapped because
there was no insurance or because the
rates went up, it's they just don't want
to put their crews at risk. No, they
don't want to and you don't want to put
your crew at Yes.
>> And it should people should know though
too that ultimately the decision
to do that type of um um
course is for the master of the vessel
to decide. It's not you know, you can't
you can't direct him to do something
that he believes will put the crew and
the ship at risk. That is
rule number one. This is a core maritime
principle.
Yeah, yeah, yes, exactly. The other
thing I wanted to um mention is that
actually I was speaking to um
one of our colleagues uh that's uh uh
that manages our European subsidiary and
he has a extensive um experience in
Holland on war. I was given to
understand that the ships that were
trapped on the inside were given
different rates than ships that were
looking to go in and out. So the the the
ships that were trapped, they was taken
into account that it it it's not an
initiative to trade in a high-risk area.
That they are trapped and if they want
the rates were significantly lower to
come out if you were trapped than it was
for those ships looking to actually
transit to do regular trade through the
the high risk. And in those cases when
they were looking to trade the the rates
were ranging from anywhere from 3 to 10%
of the whole value. The ones that were
initiating this type of trade, whereas
compared to the ones on the inside, the
average rate I was told was about .5.
It's a big It's a big difference. Um so
that is very important to understand and
and insurance was always available. It's
just
>> Yeah. whether you wanted to do it really
ultimately. And the operators and our
members that we spoke to
all made it very clear that the safety
of their crew was much more important
than and then and then everything else.
Yeah. It makes a lot of sense to me that
like certain types of insurance that end
up in this the sort of self-insurance
model are the types that are like highly
stable and predictable. Tracy, do you
remember
AOL, it was still a public company. Oh
wow.
>> And I don't know if anyone remembers
this, a little bit of insurance history.
They um the CEO said on its earnings
call that the company's profits had
taken a hit because one of their
employees had a very high complicated
pregnancy. And it was so big that they
actually he noted and then everyone sort
of figured it out I think who it was and
it was like a pretty egregious like
privacy violation. But they were
self-insured because it's a large
company and over time you're like, you
know, your health your health insurance
costs are going to be stable from one
year to another, but it was just I guess
such an expensive
pregnancy that uh he mentioned it on the
call as having affected earnings that
quarter. But it does seem um yeah, it
but it but it I this really put clicked
that when you have a type of insurance
in which distribute payout distributions
are roughly stable on a year-to-year
basis, that is the natural time for the
sort of nonprofit uh self-insurance
model of some sort.
>> Well, actually though, there is a nuance
to that. So for yeah, so because it's
not really always stable. Okay.
>> spread out enough
that there's a resiliency to it. Okay.
They're able to withstand the
volatility. Yeah. The model is able to
withstand the volatility. Well, could I
since there are multiple clubs that um
carriers can choose
do you risk like do clubs risk like sort
of
um snowball effects uh
carriers defect and then suddenly you
have fewer members and then the risk is
like magnified? Like is that a tension
from one club to another? Um
I mean I wouldn't want to be part of a
small club.
We're a small club. Oh, I'm sorry.
I wouldn't want to be a member of A
SMALL CLUB. I MEAN LIKE I MEAN LIKE A
really like tiny club where it's like
the two of us were going to insure each
other, you know? Yeah, no, no, it has to
be No, no club is that small. Yeah,
yeah, yeah, no club is that small.
>> this is what I'm saying. Like it feels
like you need some critical mass.
>> Right. It's well to like I said
the clubs collectively insure 90% of
ocean-going tonnage. So being a smaller
club is still a big club.
>> Yeah, yeah, yes, exactly. There's a
level in which like
mutual insurance is There are there are
rules in place um to deal with certain
things like that. Like you actually it's
true, you actually um don't because P&I
has a long tail, right? So like some
claims could take some claims are still
open 10 years after and sometimes even
longer.
Um so that's why actually the mutual
system allows for multi-year openness.
>> be part of a
Um but they yes, there are there are we
you know, we do have agreements in place
that protect that protect us from things
like that. Yeah. And and the way the
pooling and reinsurance mechanism works,
it's all relative to your size. Okay.
Right. So the clubs collectively pool
claims, individual claims between 10
million and 100 million dollars.
And then beyond that they're buying this
reinsurance up to three three and a half
billion.
Got it.
>> But what you pay is is there's a there's
a formula which we're not going to go
through. It gets complicated, but it's
based on your relative size. Yeah.
And risk factor.
>> you're paying less for these large
marathon casualties. Whereas a larger
club it's going to take a big hit even
if it's not their claim.
>> So it's all scaled. It's all scaled and
it's quite fair. And the concept
actually is that everybody pays their
share over time. Right.
>> Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So you Well, you what
you what you take out you need to put
back in.
>> Right. And that's at the at the club
level and at the at the the in the group
level. Yeah, the group level, let's say.
Yeah. Just going back to um the Strait
of Hormuz for a second. There are some
ships from certain companies that have
been like running through despite
everything going on. And the one that
springs to mind is um Dynacom. And I
actually I sent an email to them asking
if if I could get um their owner captain
on the phone.
>> on odd lots and I haven't received a
response, perhaps unsurprisingly. But
like what is enabling them to get
through versus other ships?
>> Yeah, I don't think that that's
something that we'd be able to really
Okay.
>> They're not our members. Um we're not
familiar. We do we do have another
member though that was hit. Um the other
thing I wanted to mention is that
despite the fact that the that the P&I
clubs are not the primary um insurer on
on a case of war, we actually do take an
active part. So we are So um we are
involved. We are close to the member
because we have a very close
relationship with all of our members to
begin with, right? Um we are most of the
time copied on all the correspondence,
so we also provide some guidance because
besides the P&I side, we also have
what's called an FD&D cover and that's
freight to margin defense. And so that
helps the owners with Um disputes that
may arise, contractual disputes. We
don't insure the claims themselves, but
we um provide the guidance, the legal
guidance. We have a lot of lawyers
within the club. But we also support
them if we have to hire uh lawyers
outside to defend or to pursue any
claims that they may have and that's a
legal costs cover. So a lot of the times
even on cases that we are not directly
responsible for or not directly not
responsible for but covering, we're
usually quite involved. Like I said,
we're protection and indemnity. The
protection part of it involves standing
next to the member um and guiding them.
But the intricacies of any particular
owner being able to cross the strait is
not something that we're actually privy
to. So but um yeah, I I I I mean the
only thing I can say is that I know that
there are certain factors that are
looked at by the Iranians when they are
attacking, you know, yeah.
>> This is such an interesting
conversation. It could go a lot longer
than I thought it could. I'm looking at
a um
there's article about Dynacom, the the
owner of the billionaire shipping
magnate Greek buccaneer George
Prokopiou. Is that's the name of the
firm. I notice so um at the American
Club, you have office locations in New
York, London, also in Piraeus in Greece.
And then also Shanghai and Hong Kong.
And I'm just curious like so like aside
this current moment aside, we all sort
of know that um Greece specifically is
one of the centers of shipping
>> It's the number one.
Number one. But has it moved east over
time? Like like Okay, we know that a lot
of the shipbuilding Yeah.
>> is happening in Asia. And we also know
that so many of the routes are Asia
dominated etc. Have the financial flows
of insurance moved east in the same way
the physical flows Have the financial
flows of insurance moved towards Asia, I
should say specifically rather than On
the insurance side?
>> Yeah, on the insurance side has the has
the has insurance money moved
towards Asia in the same way that the
trade flows have?
>> No. No. Not from an international
perspective. The
uh China does have its own P&I club.
It's not a member of the international
uh group of P&I clubs. They do have
reinsurance relationships with some of
the the clubs that are members of the
group. Um it's a very large um P&I club,
but it generally insures um
uh Chinese um managed and owned tonnage.
>> and trade is so Asia dominated, the
financial element of the insurance has
not
>> On the insurance, no, it hasn't really
Not from the international side of
things. Not not yet. Not from the
international side of things. I think
even um all the the the major traders
are still um insuring with the UK,
Scandinavian and and and American
American clubs, yeah. I would say. It's
Steve, I don't know if you've seen
anything different. I've not seen
anything different. If the US starts
building ships again, yeah, is that
great for the American P&I club? Does
your would your like membership
automatically increase?
>> It wouldn't automatically increase. No,
because there's no directive in There's
no directive in any country that you
need to
that your insurance has to be, you know,
domestic.
But it would probably increase our
potential to grow if we began to
build ships in the in the United States.
Yeah. Do you see any signs of that
actually happening? We've done a number
of episodes on how to get People who
wanted it to happen. People who wanted
it to happen. Yeah. I mean we want it to
happen, too. Well, we we want the
American maritime industry generally to
become stronger. We think it's a We do
think it's a shame
how it's developed over time. The
American Club also was a part of that.
You know, like I said,
up until we internationalized, you know,
our membership was very very small cuz
it was only American and the maritime
fleet was shrinking at that time.
Obviously, we are the only We are the
only club while the while the all the
clubs have a presence in the United
States, not all of them, but many of
them. They don't have an actual
regulatory domicile like we do. Um so if
the American Club and all of its people
in the United States
are probably the most significant and
the deepest bench in terms of know-how
of managing and underwriting maritime
casualties.
And we're very proud of that. We've been
doing that for almost 110 years now. So
we're Not us personally, but
the company itself. Um but yeah,
obviously we are
very supportive and we are actually very
active and we have relationships also
with all the agencies. We We actually
insure all of the Marad training
vessels. We know all of the agencies
very very well. We have active
relationships and we are very much a
part of that American industry that is
looking to bolster what's happening here
in the United States. Joe, you need to
build a ship and then and then join the
club. Well, you mentioned that there are
shipping startups, so it could happen.
All right. Dorothea Ioannou and Steve
Okalucian, thank you so much for coming
on Odd Lots. Really appreciate it. Thank
you so much for having us. All right,
Joe. That was a fascinating episode, for
sure. I feel like I am slowly getting a
better handle on the maritime insurance
industry. It is interesting to me how
like divided all those different risks
are. And to Steve's point, the idea
being that like, well,
if you're a P&I club, you can kind of
price out the risks of going from A to B
with like a certain type of cargo in a
certain like predictable manner. But if
you're doing war risk insurance, that's
a very different kettle of fish. You
know, it's sort of That's a maritime
expression for you. Oh, yeah.
Good job. Thanks.
It actually makes a lot of sense to me,
this idea that like war the pricing for
war insurance would reset very quickly.
Right? Because one could imagine, say
like buying a multi-year You know, oh,
you're going to buy this insurance and
it's going to cover you for the next few
years. Most of the time there's not war.
And so most of the time you don't want
to be paying a war premium, etc. So it's
all just like a trade-off. It's like,
okay, like no one loves it a war breaks
out, so suddenly like your premiums are
going to surge the next week.
>> Yeah. I don't think anyone's very
excited about that, but that's just the
flip side for getting really low war
risk insurance the vast majority of the
time when war is not going to be an
issue for you. It's just a trade-off in
terms of like how long do you want to be
paying for it and so on. So that that
actually made quite a bit of sense to
me.
>> Well, it also seems like the limiting
factor on ships getting through the
strait at the moment isn't in fact
insurance at all. It's like whether you
can
Yeah, the surviv- Yeah, the captain's
and the safety of the crew and just
being sort of like a sane So even though
insurers run the world, there are limits
to the abilities of insurers, I would
say, to affect human No, I think it's
really interesting. At first, I was
like, well, how is a ship and their
liability like a car where there's, you
know, But, you know, then you see like
all their posters and then saying all of
these very safety
>> You love those posters. No, they're
really interesting cuz some of them are
like, you know, make sure you're getting
enough sleep. Don't check Yeah, don't
check your email all the time. I think
there's a drinking one, too. Um oh,
yeah, take control of fatigue,
everything in moderation. So it's
actually very similar to a car
to sort of liability insurance for a car
just in the fact that like the basics of
safety
apply to
a ship as a ship as well. I'm going to
print out the the cell phone one and get
it framed and put it on your desk, Joe.
As a present. I That would I would like
that. I would like that. All right.
Shall we leave it there? Let's leave it
there. This has been another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
You can follow me at Tracy Alloway. And
I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow me at
The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dash
Bennett at Dash Bot, and Kilburgs at
Kilburgs. And for more Odd Lots content,
you should check out our daily
newsletter. You'll find that at
bloomberg.com/oddlots.
And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe. Thanks
for watching.